# 3. Big Edits 

While `nano` is nice to make edits on small text files, you'll regularly be working with large files thousands of lines long and you won't be able to make edits using just `nano`. In many of these cases, you'll want to find a certain string (a series of characters) in your file and replace it with a different string. For example, imagine you are working with a fasta file that looks like the following and you want to replace `QAIV_1KP_ID:12345679` with the taxon name (e.g., <i> Dryopteris ludoviciana</i>).  
```
>QAIV_1KP_ID:123456789 Contig 1
ACTAGGGGTCAGTGAGTCGATGAGTGTGTGCGTGATCGATCGCCTAGCTAGCTACGTAGC
>QAIV_1KP_ID:123456789 Contig 2
AGTCTGATCGATCGATCATAGAACGAATATAGAGCTAGCTAGCTAGCTAATATAAAAAAA
```
And so on. You don't want to have to edit every single header individually- that would take way too long! In these cases you can use find-and-replace tools such as `sed`, `awk`, and `grep` to help. I'll summarize these command below. You'll also want to know some basic Regular Expresions (RegEx) for using these tools. Some information about RegEx is at the bottom of this section. 

<b>grep</b> 

`grep` searches through a file looking for a certain pattern. 

<b>awk</b>

<b>sed</b> 

Redirecting output 

<b>RegEx</b>

Regular Expressions are incredibly helpful and it is worth your time leaning them. These are essentially tools that you can use to find (or capture) a diverse array of characters for find-and-replace commands. Dr. Matt Gitzendanner has put together a very nice series of videos illustrating the power of RegEx and some simple examples [here](https://comptoolsres.github.io/TLCL_3.html). Note that there are some expressions that aren't consistent across platforms. I also prefer to use brackets for some expressions (such as digits). Some of the most common expressions I've used are listed below: 

| RegEx         | Captured Characters       |
| ------------- |:-------------------------:|
| [0-9] or \d         | any digit                 | 
| [A-Z]         | any letter (captial, depending on if that command is case-sensitive)      |
| [a-z]         | any letter (lowercase, depending on if that command is case-senstitive)   |
| .             | any character             |
| \s            | white space               |
| \t            | tab                       |
| \n            | new line (line break)     |

To escape characters such as the period (which usually capture any character) and capture just a period, you can put a backslash (\\) in front of that character. For example:

|RegEx | Captured Characters|
| ------------- |:-------------------------:|
|\\.          | this will capture a period |
|\\,          |this will capture a comma|

<b>What do brackets do?</b> Brackets can be used to combine multiple expressions. Say you want to capture a digit <u> and</u> a letter. You can include both of the approriate RegEx commands in a pair of brackets, like this `[0-9A-Z]`. 

<b>How do you capture more than one character at a time?</b> There are several quantifiers that you can use to capture several characters at a time. Here is a short list: 

| RegEx         | Number of Captured Characters       |
| ------------- |:-------------------------:|
|*              |zero or more |
|+              |one or more  |

<b>Capturing and keeping parts of a search.</b> Sometimes you don't always want to replace a whole expression, but only part of it. You can keep parts of your expression by closing them in with parentheses. They stored in a variable that you can retrieve either with "1" or "$1". Take our example from above. 

```
>QAIV_1KP_ID:123456789 Contig 1
ACTAGGGGTCAGTGAGTCGATGAGTGTGTGCGTGATCGATCGCCTAGCTAGCTACGTAGC
```

Say we want to capture the `QAIV_1KP_ID:12345679` but want to keep `QAIV`. We can capture `QAIV` and put it in parantheses and then capture the rest of the header but leave it out of the parentheses (in this case, I want to keep "Contig 1"): `([A-Z]+)\_[A-Z\_\:0-9]*`. If we were using sed:
```
sed -i 's/([A-Z]+)\_[A-Z\_\:0-9]*/1/g' filename.txt
```

There are nice tables (cheat sheets) for RegEx [here](https://www.rexegg.com/regex-quickstart.html). You can practice in Sublime Text by doing "Find and Replace" or "ctrl-H". 

# Exercises

`cd` into the "3Practice" folder. You'll find a file called "TRBL.fasta" in there. This file type is very common for DNA/RNA sequence data. `head` the file. You'll notice that the file is composed of lines of two types: one begins with ">" and contains information about the sequence that follows and is called the "header", and the line that follows contains sequence data. 

First, we want to change the code in the headers to the appropriate species. We can pretend this is Yeti DNA! Let's change `TRBL_ID:123456789` to `Yeti_yeti` and write the results to a new file called `Yeti.fasta`. (Hint: make sure to use the `-r` flag if using `sed`. 

How many lines are there in Yeti.fasta? 

How many instances of the string "ATTG" are there Yeti.fasta? (Hint: you might have to combine commands from steps 2 and 3!)
